.TH ROSIE 1
.SH NAME
rosie \- quick chat and command generation with Ollama-backed model selection
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rosie
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIPROMPT\fR]...
.PP
.B rosie --ask
[\fI--model MODEL\fR] [\fIPROMPT\fR]...
.PP
.B rosie --cmd
[\fI--model MODEL\fR] [\fIPROMPT\fR]...
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rosie
supports two explicit non-TUI runtime modes:
.IP \[bu] 2
.B --ask
for one-shot chat responses
.IP \[bu] 2
.B --cmd
for shell command generation with interactive
.B e/r/q
review flow
.PP
When run without
.B --ask
or
.B --cmd,
Rosie launches the full-screen TUI chat interface with a centered landing screen, then conversation/chat panes.
From landing, type a prompt and press
.B Enter
to start chatting, use
.B Ctrl+P
or
.B :
for the command palette, and
.B F1
for help.
Once in chat, Rosie starts in
.B Normal
mode. Press
.B i
to enter
.B Insert
mode; pressing
.B Enter
sends the composer content to Ollama, and assistant tokens stream into transcript as they arrive.
.B j
/
.B k
(or arrow keys) scroll transcript in
.B Normal
mode.
.B PageUp
/
.B PageDown
perform full-page scrolling, and
.B Ctrl+u
/
.B Ctrl+d
perform half-page scrolling.
.B [
/
.B ]
jump between assistant response blocks.
.B gg
jumps to top and
.B G
jumps to bottom.
The top status line displays active session and streaming state.
New sessions are auto-titled from the first user message using a concise local heuristic, then refined with a model-generated title when available.
If existing sessions are present, Rosie restores the last active session on launch; if none exist, Rosie creates one when chat begins.
.B Backspace
edits input. Press
.B Esc
to return to
.B Normal
mode. Press
.B :
or
.B Ctrl+P
to open the floating command panel (for example:
.B :help ,
.B :session ,
.B :models ,
.B :theme ,
.B :quit
).
In the command panel, use
.B j
/
.B k
(or arrow keys) to select from the command picklist and
.B Enter
to run.
In session manager
.RB ( :session ),
use
.B j
/
.B k
to select,
.B Enter
to switch,
.B n
to create,
.B r
to rename,
and
.B d
to delete (with confirmation).
In the model picker, use
.B j
/
.B k
(or arrow keys) to move, press
.B Enter
to apply to the active session, and
.B Esc
to cancel.
Use
.B :theme
to switch TUI themes.
Session model selections persist and are restored when switching sessions or restarting.
Assistant output supports lightweight markdown rendering, and fenced code blocks are framed and syntax-highlighted when possible.
Delete actions require confirmation with
.B [Y/n]
(press
.B Enter
for yes).
Press
.B Esc
in
.B Normal
to cancel an in-flight request. Use
.B Ctrl+C
to quit from any mode.
.PP
Prompts can be supplied as trailing arguments or from standard input. If neither is provided in an interactive terminal, Rosie prompts for one line of input.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --config
Interactively create or update local configuration in
.I ~/.config/rosie/config.toml
(including active provider selection and provider settings).
.TP
.B --install
Install the current binary into the local bin directory, install this man page into the local man directory, and sync bundled themes into
.I ${XDG_CONFIG_HOME}/rosie/themes
(or
.I ~/.config/rosie/themes
when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is unset).
.TP
.BR -a , " --ask"
Run one-shot chat mode and print the answer once.
.TP
.BR -c , " --cmd"
Run command-generation mode (existing non-TUI flow with execute/re-enter/quit prompt).
.TP
.BI --model " MODEL"
Override model selection for this invocation.
.TP
.BR -V , " --version"
Display version information and exit.
.TP
.BR -h , " --help"
Print help information.
.TP
.B rosie auth add
Store a provider API key in the OS keychain.
.TP
.B rosie auth list
Show whether provider credentials are available from environment variables or keychain storage.
.TP
.B rosie auth remove
Delete a provider API key from the OS keychain.
.SH CONFIGURATION
Rosie uses file-based configuration:
.TP
.I ~/.config/rosie/config.toml
(or
.I ${XDG_CONFIG_HOME}/rosie/config.toml
when
.B XDG_CONFIG_HOME
is set).
.PP
Supported keys:
.TP
.B active_provider
Name of the provider entry Rosie should use.
.TP
.B [providers.<name>]
Named provider definitions, including provider
.B type
and provider-specific fields such as
.B endpoint
and
.B model
.TP
.B allow_insecure_http
Optional for
.B openai-compatible
providers to permit non-HTTPS endpoints outside localhost and
.B 192.168.x.x
.TP
.B theme
TUI theme name (built-in or file-based) loaded from
.IR ~/.config/rosie/themes/<name>.toml
(or
.IR ${XDG_CONFIG_HOME}/rosie/themes/<name>.toml ).
Custom theme files use semantic
.B [ui]
and
.B [state]
color sections.
.TP
.B execution_enabled
If false, command execution is disabled in
.B --cmd
while generation remains available
.PP
Model resolution order:
.IP "1." 4
.B --model
.IP "2." 4
active provider
.B model
.IP "3." 4
first provider-discovered model when supported
.PP
API keys resolve from provider-specific environment variables first and then the OS keychain. OpenAI uses
.BR OPENAI_API_KEY ,
Anthropic uses
.BR ANTHROPIC_API_KEY ,
and named compatible providers use
.BR ROSIE_<PROVIDER_NAME>_API_KEY .
.PP
OpenAI and Anthropic endpoints must use HTTPS. OpenAI-compatible endpoints may use plain HTTP on localhost, loopback IPs, and
.B 192.168.x.x
by default; other non-HTTPS hosts require
.BR allow_insecure_http " = true" .
.PP
Rosie routes `--ask`, `--cmd`, and TUI chat through the configured provider runtime. TUI model discovery depends on whether the active provider supports listing models.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/rosie/config.toml
Persistent local configuration written by
.BR rosie " --config" .
.TP
.I ${XDG_DATA_HOME}/rosie/sessions.sqlite3
Session/message persistence database used by TUI mode.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/rosie/sessions.sqlite3
Default TUI session database path when
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
is unset.
.TP
.I ~/.local/bin/rosie
Default install location for the executable when
.B XDG_BIN_HOME
is unset.
.TP
.I ~/.local/share/man/man1/rosie.1
Default install location for this man page when
.B XDG_DATA_HOME
is unset.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Configure Rosie:
.B rosie --config
.TP
Install Rosie:
.B rosie --install
.TP
Quick chat:
.B rosie --ask "What's the capital of France?"
.TP
Generate a command:
.B rosie --cmd "show top 10 processes by memory"
.TP
Prompt from standard input:
.B echo "find large files" | rosie --cmd
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B rosie
exits with status 0 on success and non-zero on error.
